JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: More
details trickle
out about the Orlando massacre
and the shooter.
We get the latest from our team
on the ground.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Tuesday: It
was used in Sandy Hook, San
Bernardino, Aurora
,and now Orlando. The
AR-15-style weapon is
becoming a favorite among mass
shooters. A
look at America's most
controversial rifle.
GWEN IFILL: And with a rise in
homegrown terror
attacks, what the White House
and local programs
are doing to fight violent
extremism in America.
RIZWAN JAKA, All Dulles Area
Muslim Society:
If you see someone that is going
to do harm
to our country or you hear about
it, we absolutely
must tell law enforcement. That
is our Islamic
duty.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The search for
answers in Orlando
is taking authorities down new
avenues tonight.
Emerging accounts today raised
more questions
about the man who shot 49 people
to death
before people shot and killed
him.
William Brangham reports from
Orlando.
QUESTION: When you saw his
picture, what went
through your mind?
JIM VAN HORN, Florida: We just
went, oh, like,
yes, that makes sense. There,
that's Omar.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's a new
wrinkle into
the investigation into Orlando
shooter Omar
Mateen. Some of the patrons of
the Pulse nightclub
are now saying Mateen was a
frequent visitor.
JIM VAN HORN: He used to come in
the bar about
-- on the weekends. Sometimes,
he would be
there. Sometimes, he would miss
a couple of
weeks and then be in again. He
was a regular.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: This
afternoon, the nightclub's
owner said through a spokeswoman
that the
reports are -- quote -- "untrue
and totally
ridiculous."
But the Associated Press
reported the FBI
is investigating those claims,
as well as
others that Mateen may have used
a dating
app for gay men.
KEVIN WEST, Florida: The last
contact was
like three months ago. And as
soon as I saw
the picture on the news, I
quickly noticed
the person's face.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: These
allegations come as
something of a departure from
what was previously
said about the attacker.
Mateen's father has
said his son became upset months
ago after
seeing two men kissing in Miami,
but, otherwise,
never seemed homophobic.
Investigators are also talking
to the gunman's
wife. NBC News reports she told
federal agents
that she tried to dissuade her
husband from
carrying out the attack. She
also said she
was with him when he bought
ammunition and
a holster, and once drove him to
the club
because he wanted to scope it
out.
Meanwhile, some of those who
escaped with
their lives spoke today at
Orlando Medical
Center.
ANGEL COLON, Orlando Attack
Survivor: I hear
him, and he's shooting everyone
that's already
dead on the floor, making sure
they're dead.
I look over, and he shoots the
girl next to
me. And I'm just there laying
down. I'm thinking,
I'm next. I'm dead.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Angel Colon
was shot several
times. Fighting back tears, he
described his
rescue by police.
ANGEL COLON: I don't feel pain,
but I just
feel all this blood on me from
myself, from
my other people. And he just
drops me off
across the street, and I look
over and there's
just bodies everywhere. We're
all in pain.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All this as
the FBI continues
to scour the scene of the
shooting. Lines
of agents and officers worked
through the
club's grounds this morning,
laying down markers
and identifying potential clues.
As the investigation here in
Orlando ends
its third day, there's been a
flurry of activity
in Washington. President Obama
and members
of the U.S. House were briefed
by top national
security officials. Today, the
president called
again for cracking down on
assault-style weapons,
and barring those on a terror
watch list from
buying guns.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Otherwise, despite extraordinary
efforts across
our government, by local law
enforcement,
by our intelligence agencies, by
our military,
despite all the sacrifices that
folks make,
these kinds of events are going
to keep on
happening.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: After the
session with the
president, FBI Director James
Comey also briefed
members of the House on the
investigation,
behind closed doors.
And around the country,
thousands of Americans
are responding in their own
ways, with tributes
and vigils in a number of cities
last night.
In New York, supporters gathered
in front
of the historic Stonewall Inn,
where the modern
gay rights movement began. And
back in Orlando,
thousands met in the city's
downtown. There,
they lit candles and read aloud
the names
of the 49 killed.
Dew Sizemore, who lost six of
his friends
to the shooting, said the
ceremonies gave
him a small sliver of comfort.
DEW SIZEMORE, Florida: And I
feel like I can
leave here and start to heal.
And it's the
beginning, the beginning of a
long road ahead
of us, but hopefully tonight
will help a lot
of people. It helped me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The president
is planning
on coming here to Orlando
Thursday, where
he will likely meet with family
members and
victims of the shooting.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
in Orlando, Florida.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news: President
Obama rebuked Donald Trump for
his renewed
call to ban Muslim immigrants.
In a sharply
worded speech, the president
dismissed such
appeals as not the America we
want. The Republican
nominee-to-be fired back in an
e-mail to reporters,
saying of the president: "He
continues to
prioritize our enemy over our
allies, and,
for that matter, the American
people."
We will listen to some of the
president's
speech after the news summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump took
a new broadside
from his presumptive November
opponent as
well. In Pittsburgh, Hillary
Clinton accused
him of falsely claiming that she
would curb
gun rights or let in a flood of
new refugees.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
These are demonstrably lies. But
he feels
compelled to tell them because
he has to distract
us from the fact he has nothing
substantive
to say for himself.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
Party's national
chair, Reince Priebus, defended
Trump against
comments by both the president
and Hillary
Clinton. He said their policies
wouldn't prevent
terror attacks, but instead take
away Americans'
gun rights.
But the top elected Republican,
House Speaker
Paul Ryan, put some distance
between himself
and Trump on the issue of
keeping Muslims
out.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
I do not think a Muslim ban is
in our country's
interest. I do not think it is
reflective
of our principles, not just as a
party, but
as a country. And I think the
smarter way
to go in all respects is to have
a security
test and not a religious test.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All of this came
as Donald
Trump turned 70 years old today.
If elected,
he would be the oldest person to
assume the
office of the presidency.
GWEN IFILL: In France, police
carried out
a series of raids after an
attacker killed
two police officials overnight
at their home
outside Paris.
The killer, Larossi Abballa,
claimed to -- claimed
allegiance, that is, to the
Islamic State.
He was shot dead by police after
a three-hour
stand-off. A prosecutor said
Abballa had a
list of other targets, including
public officials
and journalists.
JUDY WOODRUFF: French police
also detained
43 Russian soccer fans suspected
of attacking
English supporters at the Euro
2016 soccer
tournament. Reinforcements
deployed across
Northern France, ahead of
upcoming matches.
And the European Soccer
Federation warned
Russia faces expulsion, if
there's more violence.
PEDRO PINTO, European Soccer
Federation: We
have reaffirmed our desire to
work directly
with the security forces, with
the police
forces here in France to make
sure that the
security and safety of all
participants is
of the utmost priority.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Adding to the
trouble: Labor
protests in Paris once again
turned violent,
as demonstrators battled police;
20 officers
and six protesters were injured.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, the Senate
defied a presidential veto
threat and overwhelmingly
passed a defense policy bill. It
authorizes
$602 billion in military
spending, but it
also bars the Guantanamo Bay
prison from closing,
and it blocks any new base
closings.
Similar provisions are also
contained in a
House bill, but the White House
has warned
the president will not accept
them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street fell
for a fourth
day over worries about interest
rates and
Britain's vote on the European
Union. The
Dow Jones industrial average
lost 57 points
to close near 17675. The Nasdaq
gave up five
points, and the S&P 500 slipped
three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
new efforts
to counter violent extremism
before an attack;
a look at the gun used in the
Orlando and
San Bernardino shootings;
Russian hackers
steal Democrats' research on
Donald Trump;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: How much do words
matter? Donald
Trump has regularly criticized
President Obama
and Hillary Clinton for not
using the term
radical Islam to define the
threat of terrorism.
But Mr. Obama, in extensive
remarks delivered
at the Treasury Department
today, struck back,
saying the presumptive
Republican nominee's
plan to ban Muslims from the
U.S., and the
language he uses to make his
point, is dangerous.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
There is no magic to the phrase
radical Islam.
It is a political talking point.
It is not
a strategy.
And the reason I am careful
about how I describe
this threat has nothing to do
with political
correctness and everything to do
with actually
defeating extremism.
Groups like ISIL and al-Qaida
want to make
this war a war between Islam and
America,
or between Islam and the West.
If we fall
into the trap of painting all
Muslims as a
broad brush, and imply that we
are at war
with the entire religion, then
we are doing
the terrorists' work for them.
But we are now seeing how
dangerous this kind
of mind-set and this kind of
thinking can
be. We are starting to see where
this kind
of rhetoric and loose talk and
sloppiness
about who exactly we are
fighting, where this
can lead us.
We now have proposals from the
presumptive
Republican nominee for president
of the United
States to bar all Muslims from
emigrating
into America. We hear language
that singles
out immigrants and suggests
entire religious
communities are complacent in
violence.
Where does this stop? The
Orlando killer,
one of the San Bernardino
killers, the Fort
Hood killer, they were all U.S.
citizens.
Are we going to start treating
all Muslim-Americans
differently? Are we going to
start subjecting
them to special surveillance?
Are we going
to start discriminating against
them because
of their faith?
We have heard these suggestions
during the
course of this campaign. Do
Republican officials
actually agree with this?
We have gone through moments in
our history
before when we acted out of
fear, and we came
to regret it. We have seen our
government
mistreat our fellow citizens,
and it has been
a shameful part of our history.
This is a country founded on
basic freedoms,
including freedom of religion.
We don't have
religious tests here. Our
founders, our Constitution,
our Bill of Rights are clear
about that.
And if we ever abandon those
values, we wouldn't
only make it a lot easier to
radicalize people
here and around the world, but
we would have
betrayed the very things we are
trying to
protect, the pluralism and the
openness, our
rule of law, our civil
liberties, the very
things that make this country
great, the very
things that make us exceptional.
And then the terrorists would
have won. And
we cannot let that happen. I
will not let
that happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was
President Obama speaking
today.
Omar Mateen didn't come to the
U.S. from another
country to carry out the attack
in Orlando.
He was born and raised here.
Authorities are
trying to understand whether and
how he adopted
radical ideas before he turned
to unspeakable
violence.
The Obama administration says
that stopping
the radicalization of young
people who live
in the United States is a
national security
priority.
"NewsHour" producer P.J. Tobia
has the story
of one part of that effort.
NARRATOR: America, you claim to
have the greatest
army history has known.
P.J. TOBIA: This is a call to
arms by the
so-called Islamic State, aimed
squarely at
young, disillusioned American
Muslims.
NARRATOR: Liars, fornicators,
corporations,
and for the freedoms of
sodomites.
P.J. TOBIA: This is the U.S.
government's
digital counterpoint to ISIS'
call for recruits.
It's the FBI's Don't Be a Puppet
Web site,
an online role-playing exercise.
In a kind of choose your own
adventure experience,
users walk through the steps of
extremism
and the evolution into a violent
radical.
YAAMA FUJIKURA, Japanese
American: When a
rock comes through your window
and you're
eating supper, you better have a
plan.
P.J. TOBIA: And this is the
government's offline
strategy, a program where the
elderly, like
this 89-year old
Japanese-American woman,
share their own stories of
discrimination
with Muslim teens, hoping to
prevent their
anger from festering into
violence.
YAAMA FUJIKURA: And this
business of becoming
terribly bitter and terribly
unkind to others
is not the way out.
MAN: There are some people here
who have been
through some pretty messy
things.
P.J. TOBIA: It is all part of
the Obama administration's
efforts of countering violent
extremism, or
CVE. Opponents argue it's a way
for the government
to spy on Muslims. Advocates say
it's a way
for American Muslims to work
with law enforcement,
identifying and preventing
radicalization
before attacks happen.
Mehreen Farooq runs a federally
funded CVE
initiative in Montgomery County,
Maryland.
It's the program that pairs
Muslim teens with
the elderly
MEHREEN FAROOQ, CVE Initiative:
We have brought
together various NGOs, different
faith community
leaders, educators,
counterterrorism experts,
gang prevention experts, to
understand, what
are the resources that we have
here and what
can we do to build community
resilience and
to prevent violent extremism?
P.J. TOBIA: One issue has been
getting young
men to participate, but there
are strategies
for reaching them as well.
MUHAMMED, Muslim Community
Member: They're
genuinely good kids and
everything, but they
may be a little lost in life.
P.J. TOBIA: This man is a member
of a large
Muslim community in the
mid-Atlantic region.
We will call him Muhammed. We
have concealed
his identity and altered his
voice, at his
request.
Muhammed isn't part of any
government program,
but he seeks out young Muslim
men, usually
in their early to mid-20s, who
have explored
the dark message of Islamic
extremism.
MUHAMMED: My goal is to take
them away from
that and let them know that
that's just a
bunch of fantasy.
P.J. TOBIA: Teens who think the
deck is stacked
against them are an easy target.
MUHAMMED: They really want to be
married or
they really want to have sex,
but the only
way to have sex is to be
married, and the
only way to get married is to
have a career.
And the only way to have a
career is to go
to college or go get some kind
of a skill.
For them, that looks like an
awfully tall
mountain to climb.
P.J. TOBIA: ISIS propaganda, on
the other
hand, offers immediate
gratification through
jihad.
MUHAMMED: You need to be coming
over to Syria
or Somalia. There's free sex
slaves and wives
and all of this utopia. That
resonates to
them because now they see a path
to having
a proper family.
P.J. TOBIA: Muhammed introduces
these young
men to male role models in the
Muslim community.
RIZWAN JAKA, All Dulles Area
Muslim Society:
South Asian food that will go to
South Asian
households.
P.J. TOBIA: Rizwan Jaka argues
for working
closely with the government.
He's the board
president at the All Dulles Area
Muslim Society
in suburban Virginia.
The society doesn't receive
federal CVE funds,
but partners with a local FBI
field office
and Department of Homeland
Security. It also
sponsors Boy and Girl Scout
programs.
RIZWAN JAKA: If you see someone
that is going
to do harm to our country or you
hear about
it, we absolutely must tell law
enforcement.
That is our Islamic duty.
P.J. TOBIA: Secretary of
Homeland Security
Jeh Johnson visited the
society's mosque twice
last year. This year, the
organization received
a community leadership award
from the FBI.
Last night, members took part in
an interfaith
vigil for those killed in the
Orlando attacks.
RIZWAN JAKA: We bring the FBI
here for town
hall meetings and speaking to
the community
during prayer services, engaging
together
for a better society.
P.J. TOBIA: Parents have brought
troubled
youth who have broken no laws,
but shown an
interest in ideology of the
Islamic State,
to the society's imam, Mohamed
Magid.
RIZWAN JAKA: Imam Magid actually
talks with
them, especially when they ask
about ISIS,
because there's this twisted
idealism that
people have of ISIS, these few
individuals,
and he challenges them. Imam
Magid says look,
I know, where in the Koran does
it say you
can burn someone alive?
P.J. TOBIA: The push for CVE
comes straight
from the top.
In 2011, President Obama
released his first
CVE strategy. Last year, the
White House hosted
an international summit with
representatives
from more than 100 nations and
dozens of American
Muslim groups. The Department of
Homeland
Security's CVE Task Force
provides oversight
for the entire government's
strategy in this
area. The president is asking
for more than
$96 million for these programs
in 2017.
JEH JOHNSON, U.S. Secretary of
Homeland Security:
This is as critical as any other
homeland
security mission that we have
going right
now.
P.J. TOBIA: Secretary Johnson
has spoken widely
about the role of America's
Muslims in stopping
terrorist attacks. "NewsHour"
co-anchor Judy
Woodruff discussed it with him
last week.
JEH JOHNSON: The global
terrorist threat has
evolved to include, not just
terrorist-directed
attacks, but terrorist-inspired
attacks by
homegrown, home-born violent
extremists. In
this environment, it's critical
that we dedicate
ourselves to CVE.
P.J. TOBIA: Johnson describes
the initiatives
as a way to connect with
minority communities.
JEH JOHNSON: To build bridges,
send the message
let us help you in your efforts
to counter
violent extremism in your
community if you
see someone going in the wrong
direction.
P.J. TOBIA: Some argue the
approach is too
soft, ignoring what they see as
the real problem,
Islamic terrorism.
Meanwhile, some Muslim groups
and civil libertarians
say that countering violent
extremism programs
turns teachers and imams into
spies, and innocent
Muslims into suspects.
DALIA MOGAHED, Institute for
Social Policy
and Understanding: Stigmatizing
people doesn't
make us safer. It actually
alienates young
people and can make them more
susceptible,
more vulnerable to the
propaganda of extremists.
P.J. TOBIA: Dalia Mogahed
researches American
Muslims and is the co-author of
"Who Speaks
for Islam?"
DALIA MOGAHED: Its premise is
that a community
is predisposed to violence. For
no other reason
than because of their faith,
they are essentially
a pool of suspects and are
engaged on that
premise. There is a
securitization of the
relationship between the U.S.
government and
Muslims.
P.J. TOBIA: She thinks that this
securitization
can have ripple effects within
the community.
DALIA MOGAHED: When you get to a
situation
where educators or mental health
professionals
are being asked to act as
informants, you
are going to create an
environment where people
aren't trusting their teachers.
JEH JOHNSON: It's not at all
throwing a net
of suspicion on these groups. I
totally agree
that we shouldn't do that, but
if they see
somebody traveling in the wrong
direction,
contact law enforcement, contact
a community
leader, say something to
somebody.
P.J. TOBIA: Meanwhile, some
Muslim parents
fear that if a child suddenly
developed has
an interest in the so-called
Islamic State,
reporting that interest could
lead directly
to a jail cell.
JEH JOHNSON: Parents should
encourage someone
who is upset about something,
who finds a
certain appeal, to channel that
interest and
energy into a more positive,
peaceful direction.
There are many different ways to
counter violent
extremism beyond just contacting
law enforcement.
P.J. TOBIA: Many of those ways
hope to build
trust in Muslim communities that
feel under
the microscope.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm P.J.
Tobia.
GWEN IFILL: The weapon used in
the Orlando
shootings is at once one of the
most popular
and most reviled weapons in
America, the AR-15,
the civilian version of the U.S.
military's
standard issue rifle.
John Yang has a closer look.
JOHN YANG: The NRA says it's
America's most
popular rifle, used legally and
safely by
millions of people. A lawyer for
victims'
families says it's the gold
standard for mass
murder of innocent civilians.
The AR-15 has been used in some
of the nation's
worst mass shootings, at the
Sandy Hook Elementary
School in Newtown, Connecticut,
a movie theater
in Aurora, Colorado, an Oregon
community college,
and now an Orlando gay club.
To learn more about the rifle,
its popularity
among gun enthusiasts and its
place in American
culture, we went to a Northern
Virginia gun
range to speak with former
Deputy Assistant
Defense Secretary Phillip
Carter, himself
a gun owner, who knows the AR-15
well from
his service as an Army officer.
Why is this weapon so popular?
PHILLIP CARTER, Former U.S.
Deputy Assistant
Defense Secretary: So, the AR-15
is America's
rifle because it's what
America's military
carries.
It's modeled on the M-16 that's
been carried
by America's Army and America's
Marine Corps
and the rest of our services
since Vietnam.
Today, roughly 20,000 troops
carry a similar
rifle in Iraq and Afghanistan,
and even those
who don't serve feel that
they're part of
that effort when they carry the
AR-15.
JOHN YANG: I have read that the
recoil is
a bit gentler than some other
rifles.
PHILIP CARTER: So, the recoil on
the M-16
or the AR-15 is designed to be
light, so that
you can keep it on target and
continue to
shoot bullet after bullet after
bullet. It's
by design.
There's a massive spring here in
the stock
that absorbs quite a bit of the
recoil. There's
also, by design, a gas system
that takes a
lot of the gas from the firing
of each bullet,
and it evaporates it, so that
when each bullet
is fired, that gas and that
recoil isn't coming
back on the shoulder each time,
but it's actually
in the rifle in a more
constructive manner.
JOHN YANG: And that feature
would also allow
a shooter to keep steady.
PHILIP CARTER: It's a military
rifle. It's
designed to deliver masses of
bullets to a
very specific target over time.
This is a
weapon designed to kill in mass
quantities.
It's a military weapon.
JOHN YANG: So this is
essentially a civilian
version, you said, of the M-4 or
the M-16.
PHILIP CARTER: Yes. This is very
much like
a civilian version of a Humvee
or a civilian
version of some other type of
military gear.
There are some modifications to
this that
have been made to make it a
civilian variant.
What's different on the civilian
versions
is, it only allows semiautomatic
fire. So
you flip this to fire, and it
allows you to
shoot one shot at a time. The
military versions
would allow you to switch to
semiautomatic
and then, once more, either for
three-round
bursts or for fully automatic,
if you're shooting
an older variant of the M-16.
JOHN YANG: Fully automatic,
meaning?
PHILIP CARTER: You squeeze the
trigger, and
the weapon keeps firing until
the magazine
runs dry. Your ability to put
bullets down-range
with this weapon is limited
mostly by your
ability to reload it.
And the magazine for this rifle
looks like
this. This is a 30-round
magazine that carries
30 bullets of the
5.56-millimeter variety.
And it goes into the magazine
well right here.
It's very easy to reload. It's
very easy to
get more ammunition in there and
continue
to shoot at your target.
The ammunition for the M-16 or
the AR-15 is
a 5.56-millimeter bullet. It's a
very small
and very fast bullet that does a
lot of tissue
damage when it hits a person. So
just the
tip here is the bullet. It's
roughly the size
of your pinkie tip. But it's
propelled forward
by a massive cartridge of powder
that shoots
this at a very high velocity,
creating a bullet
that can punch through targets,
whether they're
human or otherwise, with a great
deal of lethality
and power.
The other thing about this
bullet is, because
it's so small and moves so fast,
it tends
to tumble or become volatile
when it hits
a person, and so it tends to
create a very
wound and very
difficult-to-treat wounds.
Again, it's a military weapon.
It's not designed
for hunting, where you might
want to preserve
the meat so that you can eat it.
It's designed
to wound or kill soldiers in
combat.
JOHN YANG: There are hundreds of
companies
in the United States that make
verges of the
AR-15. The NRA says the weapon
can be used
not only for hunting, but for
sports shooting
and self-defense.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": an
aquarium moving
its dolphins to an ocean
sanctuary; and one
year after the mass shooting in
Charleston,
how that city's Mother Emanuel
AME Church
is healing.
GWEN IFILL: But, first: The
Democratic National
Committee said today Russian
government hackers
have penetrated its computer
network. Breaches
by two separate groups allowed
hackers to
access e-mails, internal chats,
and opposition
research Democrats have compiled
on presumptive
Republican nominee Donald Trump.
Hackers may have had access for
a year. The
Washington Post reported that
computer networks
for Hillary Clinton and Trump
were also targeted.
We get some insight on how this
happened and
why from Dmitri Alperovitch. He
is the co-
founder of CrowdStrike, the
intelligence company
that investigated the breach for
the DNC.
And Sasha Issenberg, a
contributor for Bloomberg
Politics and author of the book
"The Victory
Lab: The Secret Science of
Winning Campaigns."
Dmitri Alperovitch, how
significant an intrusion
was this into the Democratic
Party's file?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH, Co-Founder
and CEO, CrowdStrike:
This was a pretty scary
intrusion.
And, in fact, there were two
intrusions in
place here. Two separate Russian
government-affiliated
actors, we believe, that are
part of the intelligence
services of Russia infiltrated
the network
first in the summer of last year
and were
able to get access of the
communications service
at the DNC, essentially giving
them the ability
to monitor the e-mail traffic
that was going
through their servers, and a
completely separate
actor that penetrated that
network in April
of this year and went straight
for the research
department of the Democratic
National Committee,
specifically looking for the
opposition files
on the Republican presidential
candidate,
Donald Trump.
GWEN IFILL: How did the DNC find
out? How
were they alerted to this
intrusion, and how
were you?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, in
early May, they
discovered that there was
something off on
the network that was highly
suspicious. And
they called us in.
GWEN IFILL: Their internal I.T.
people?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Their
internal I.T. people
determined that something may be
off. They
didn't yet know if it was a
breach. They asked
us to come in and evaluate.
And, within 24 hours, we were
able to ascertain
with our software deployed on
all their machines
there was in fact two breaches
from two separate
Russian intelligence services
that were inside
that network.
GWEN IFILL: Sasha Issenberg, you
wrote a book
about how dependent campaigns
have become
on data and the things needed to
support that
amount of data, specifically
about the 2008
Obama campaign. So, in this
case, what kinds
of things exist in this -- in
these records?
SASHA ISSENBERG, Author, "The
Victory Lab":
Yes, you know, parties at this
point are largely
hubs of information.
They gather intelligence on the
electorate,
on -- data on individual voters
that they
use the make tactical decisions,
and then
they're kind of a permanent
research operation,
especially at times like this,
where there
are open primaries within a
party, and you
don't know who the nominee is
going to be.
And the DNC basically says to
the Clinton
campaign or Sanders or O'Malley
campaigns,
we will spend the year building
resources
for you that we can hand to you
when you're
the nominee. In this case, a
dossier on Donald
Trump, probably the DNC has more
information
in its files on its servers than
any other
organization that has been
researching Donald
Trump for an hour -- for a year
-- pardon
me -- and not just Trump, but
his circle,
his advisers, his staffers.
And so a foreign intelligence
organization
that wants to understand who
those people
are, the relationships they
have, potential
points of leverage or influence
would probably
find that the DNC has more of it
sitting around
than anyone else.
GWEN IFILL: Now, Sasha, it
should be said
that Clinton's campaign says
that they were
not compromised, which doesn't
mean that information
that they, as you point out,
have on file
with the DNC wasn't compromised,
but we're
not talking about financial or
donor records
here, are we?
SASHA ISSENBERG: From what we
quarter from
the reports -- and, as Dmitri
says, it seems
like there was a goal to go to
the opposition
research department.
Somebody like Hillary Clinton,
who has been
in public life for a while, you
have to imagine
that foreign intelligence
gathering operations
have tried to gather information
on her, so
that they can try to game out
how she thinks
and how she approaches things
and who her
contacts are.
Donald Trump is sort of new to
the world as
a political figure. And so for
foreign governments
that want to assess risk,
geopolitical decision-making
or potentially understand how to
get at him,
you imagine that the DNC just
has that information
available. A lot of this is
stuff that is
in the public domain, stuff from
court filings
from...
GWEN IFILL: But it's all in one
place.
(CROSSTALK)
SASHA ISSENBERG: It's all in one
place and
they have done a lot of the
legwork for you.
GWEN IFILL: Mr. Alperovitch, why
do we think
Russia is behind this?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, we
actually believe
that it's not just Russia, but
two specific
intelligence agencies within
Russia.
One is the military intelligence
agency called
the GRU, and the other possibly
the FSB, which
is the successor to the Soviet
KGB. It's actually
interesting, because we saw no
collaboration
whatsoever between those two
threat actors.
GWEN IFILL: One hand didn't know
what the
other was doing?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Not only did
they not
know what they were doing. They
were actually
doing some of the same things
repeatedly,
not knowing that someone already
had that
information that they were
after.
And this is actually not unusual
for Russia.
They have a very aggressive
competition between
their intelligence agencies.
They're always
trying to one-up one another, to
look better
in front of Putin, to get more
budget, more
power.
GWEN IFILL: But how -- what use
is this kind
of information, especially if a
lot of it
is in the public record anyhow?
What use is
it to foreign governments like
Russia?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, one,
they really
want to understand what is
Donald Trump thinking.
No one knows really. He doesn't
have a long
history in politics. He said
some complimentary
things of Putin. Is that
something that he's
going to continue if he's
president following
that policy?
But the other thing is that is
interesting
is they probably didn't know
what they would
find. They didn't know that all
this information
was public. In the Russian -- in
Russia, you
have political parties engaged
in all kinds
of nefarious activity. And they
may just assume
that in America it works the
exact same way.
GWEN IFILL: And what do you do
to stop it
from happening again?
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Well, this
weekend, we
actually did a complete
remediation of that
network. We cleaned it up. We
kicked out both
adversaries simultaneously.
So as of this week, that network
is now clean,
and DNC actually asked us to
monitor it with
our software going forward,
because we are
pretty certain that the Russians
are going
to try to regain access to that
network. Their
interest in the political system
of the United
States certainly is not going to
go away.
GWEN IFILL: And, Sasha, what do
campaigns
do as they become more and more
dependent
on this kind of electronic web
of information
to protect themselves?
SASHA ISSENBERG: Well, you know,
we saw a
different type of data breach at
the DNC six
months ago, when a Bernie
Sanders staffer
was found to have been able to
access information
that the Clinton campaign had
developed on
individual voters.
You know, that type of tactical
information,
you imagine, is not of much use
to foreign
governments. And I suspect that
foreign governments
will find that a lot of the
information that
they would get through an
opposition research
department isn't particularly
strategically
valuable.
And the goal of opposition
research ultimately
is to get this stuff into the
public eye.
And so if the DNC thought that
it was revealing
about Donald Trump, they would
probably be
similarly angling to get it out
into the public.
This is not information that's
designed to
be kept under wraps for too long
if it's tasty.
GWEN IFILL: And the RNC should
be worried
as well, I imagine.
Sasha -- Sasha Issenberg of
Bloomberg Politics
and author of "The Victory Lab,"
and Dmitri
Alperovitch of CrowdStrike,
thank you both
very much.
DMITRI ALPEROVITCH: Thank you.
SASHA ISSENBERG: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Next: our weekly
science segment.
There's a sea change coming to
one of the
country's most popular
aquariums. As many
have grown concerned about
keeping dolphins
in captivity, Baltimore's
National Aquarium
today announced that it will
move its pod
of dolphins to the first
sanctuary for these
mammals in the world.
The decision to end the dolphin
exhibit comes
after SeaWorld and Ringling
Brothers have
announced their own changes.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien broke
the story for our Leading Edge
series.
MAN: This is Chesapeake.
MILES O'BRIEN: Oh, it's
Chesapeake. Hi, Chesapeake.
Hey.
It's time for a quick physical
exam, and Chesapeake,
the bottlenose dolphin, appears
to be doing
fine. She is one of eight
dolphins held by
the National Aquarium in
Baltimore.
MAN: We're going to take a look
in her mouth.
And they have teeth and they
grab each other
and they break teeth.
MILES O'BRIEN: She doesn't need
the orthodontist.
They're nice and straight.
Born into captivity 24 years
ago, she has
always lived indoors, in a
concrete tank,
a sterile, artificial world that
bears no
resemblance to the natural
environment where
dolphins belong. But it appears
she and the
rest of this pod are destined
for a sea change.
JOHN RACANELLI,MD-BO / CEO,
National Aquarium:
We're announcing today that we
are moving
our dolphins to a sanctuary, a
seaside natural
seawater sanctuary by the end of
the year
2020.
MILES O'BRIEN: John Racanelli is
CEO of the
National Aquarium, and he's
announcing something
that has never been done before.
The aquarium
plans to build a large outdoor
Marine mammal
sanctuary in Florida or the
Caribbean, a seaside
pen carved from nature.
JOHN RACANELLI: This is a
million-and-a-half
gallons. This, we'd be looking
at tens of
millions, maybe hundreds of
millions of gallons
of water, seawater, not
manufactured saltwater,
as we do here.
MILES O'BRIEN: The decision
comes amid a rising
tide of opposition to
dolphinariums all over
the world.
Heather Morris is a frequent
protester at
the Inner Harbor in Baltimore.
HEATHER MORRIS, Animal Rights
Activist: I
think that is a crucial step in
them pioneering
a path to what is the right
thing for us to
do with these animals now, to
get them back
into an environment that is like
their natural
habitat. There is no OK scenario
for them
to be in captivity.
MILES O'BRIEN: And yet the
National Aquarium
is alone in taking this bold,
expensive step.
There are about 30 other
dolphinariums just
in the U.S.
NARRATOR: Leaping three feet out
of water
and through a small hoop is only
one of the
accomplishments of Flippy the
pride of the
studios at Marineland Florida.
MILES O'BRIEN: Humans have been
capturing
and training dolphins for
entertainment for
about 80 years. Over time, the
shows got more
elaborate, even garish, the
crowds larger,
and the venues added the
dolphins' cetacean
cousins, orcas, to the marquees.
A multibillion-dollar business
evolved that
forces wild animals and their
progeny to perform
for humans in exchange for food.
They are
trained to do circus tricks,
give thrill rides,
and be docile with customers in
glorified
petting zoos, often called a
dolphin experience.
Looking at their permanent
smile, it is easy
to misconstrue what this
experience is really
like for them.
RIC O'BARRY, Former Dolphin
Trainer: It's
really the dolphin smile that
has created
this multibillion-dollar
industry, and it's
literally an optical illusion.
MILES O'BRIEN: Ric O'Barry was
once the highest
paid dolphin trainer in the
world. He began
capturing, training and breeding
dolphins
at the Miami Seaquarium in the
1960s. He eventually
became the head trainer for a TV
series that
launched the cetacean show
business to a new
level.
WOMEN (singing): They call him
Flipper, Flipper,
Flipper, faster than lightning.
MILES O'BRIEN: "Flipper" aired
on NBC from
1964 until 1967. Flipper was
actually five
female dolphins. The pressure to
perform and
the stress of captivity took its
toll on the
dolphins' health. One of them
became despondent.
RIC O'BARRY: Flipper died in my
arms of suicide.
Yes, I know that's a very strong
word to use
for an animal, but it's the only
animal that
is not an automatic air
breather. Every breath
they take is a conscious effort.
Think about that for a second.
Every breath
is a conscious effort, which
means they can
end their life any time they
want to if it
becomes too difficult, too
stressful, by simply
not taking the next breath.
MILES O'BRIEN: By 1970, O'Barry
had a complete
change of heart. Ever since, he
has tirelessly
traveled the world crusading to
shut down
the shows, and end the era of
captivity.
RIC O'BARRY: We have to admit we
made a mistake.
MILES O'BRIEN: We found him at
The Hague,
testifying before the Dutch
Parliament, which
is pondering the fate of a
controversial dolphinarium.
RIC O'BARRY: It's been a failed
experiment.
It's time to admit that. And
we're going to
do the best we can. And it's
going to phase
it out. It's going to take many
years to phase
it out.
MILES O'BRIEN: His long campaign
picked up
a lot of steam in 2009 with the
release of
the Academy Award-winning
documentary "The
Cove." The film reveals the
brutal reality
of the annual corral of wild
dolphins in Taiji,
Japan. Fishermen there identify
the more desirable
dolphins, separate them from
their families,
and sell them to dolphin shows
for big money.
The rest of the animals are
slaughtered and
sold as meat.
MAN: They only get $600 for a
dead dolphin,
but they can get more than
$150,000 for a
live show dolphin.
MILES O'BRIEN: While the Taiji
capture and
slaughter has not ended, O'Barry
believes
it is just a matter of time
before the dolphin
shows will, and sanctuaries are
built.
RIC O'BARRY: When I first
started doing this
work trying to educate the
public, I was coming
from a place of guilt. Yes,
there is no question
about that. People thought I was
crazy. Dolphin
captivity issue? What are you
talking about?
That's not a problem. Well,
today, it's a
mainstream issue. And so I see a
lot of change.
I'm encouraged. I'm very
encouraged.
JOHN RACANELLI: Baby boomers
grew up on "Flipper,"
and millennials grew up on "Free
Willy." So
attitudes are changing. And that
is certainly
a factor. It's something we pay
close attention
to.
MILES O'BRIEN: So are the
researchers who
make it their mission to seek
out these fascinating,
intelligent mammals in the wild.
Marine mammalogist
Denise Herzing is founder and
research director
of the Wild Dolphin Project in
Jupiter, Florida.
DENISE HERZING, Founder, Wild
Dolphin Project:
It's definitely time we looked
at creating
dolphin retirement centers. We
have done it
for other species. We have done
it for chimps,
elephants, giraffes. You name
it, we have
done it. Dolphins are hard. It's
a different
environment, in a big sea pen.
It's expensive.
But we owe it to them, I think.
MILES O'BRIEN: For more than 30
years, she
and her team have studied wild
spotted dolphins
that live in shallow water off
the Bahamas,
hoping to understand their
behavior and the
depths of their intellect.
Over the years, they have built
a catalog
of 300 dolphins. In a typical
field season,
they will carefully track,
observe and record
video of about 100 individuals.
Herzing is
focused on dolphin
communication. What might
the whistles and clicks mean?
How smart are they?
DENISE HERZING: Very smart. They
problem-solve.
They can think in the abstract
and recognize
that. They have very good
comprehension and
cognitive skills, so they can
understand artificial
languages that are presented to
them. They
understand word order, word
meaning.
MILES O'BRIEN: Smart and
adaptive as they
are, captive dolphins will need
a lot of help
moving from indoor confinement
to a sanctuary,
even one that is cordoned off
and human-tended.
In Baltimore, the man in charge
of the transition
is veterinarian and chief
science officer
Brent Whitaker. He's been here
since the first
dolphins arrived in 1990.
BRENT WHITAKER, National
Aquarium: These animals
have been born in pools without
fish, without
rocks, without seaweed, without
natural sunlight,
without thunderstorms, without
hurricanes,
without all sorts of things that
other natural
dolphins have already
experienced from growing
up with.
They don't know that. They are
going to have
to learn those things, and we're
going to
have to help them learn the best
we can, but
we're not dolphins. So, there is
a challenge
there.
MILES O'BRIEN: And if all goes
as planned,
by 2020, parents and children
will no longer
be able to see the dolphins here
in the flesh.
Will future generations be
missing out on
a teachable moment?
DENISE HERZING: I really wonder,
what are
you really teaching your kids?
Are you teaching
your kids it's OK to confine an
animal, to
capture an animal for human
viewing?
JOHN RACANELLI: I think we will
be able to
ensure that people still get a
chance to tune
into the lives of these dolphins
in a way
that still inspires them, yet
not have to
have them here in Baltimore.
Maybe dolphin
Skype is in our future.
MILES O'BRIEN: And maybe then,
when people
dial up the dolphins for a
virtual visit in
their more natural habitat,
their smile will
be more than an illusion.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Baltimore.
GWEN IFILL: Next, we revisit the
city of Charleston,
South Carolina, which suffered
through its
own mass shooting one year ago
this week.
Nine people were gunned down
inside e-mail
Emanuel AME Church, including
its pastor,
the Reverend Clementa Pinckney.
Alleged white
supremacist Dylann Roof was
charged on multiple
counts, including murder and
hate crimes.
He could face the death penalty.
This past winter, the Reverend
Betty Deas
Clark took over as Emanuel's
pastor.
Jeffrey Brown spoke with her
recently, before
this week's shootings. She
traveled to Orlando
yesterday to support families
there and to
speak out in favor of gun
control.
JEFFREY BROWN: Rev. Dr. Clark,
thank you for
letting us come visit.
REV. DR. BETTY DEAS CLARK,
Pastor, Emanuel
AME Church: Thank you for
coming.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask you,
one year later,
how is your congregation faring?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Well, I
would like
to think that they're
processing, but yet
still grieving. It's a process
that may take
years, but it's good to see
signs of them
being able to smile, to laugh
again.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right away, of
course, there
were expressions of forgiveness
to an extent
that I think amazed many in the
nation and
around the world.
Is that still the sense that is
there, the
forgiveness, or are there other
emotions involved
as well?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Well,
there are an
array of emotions. But
forgiveness is more
than an emotion. It is a choice.
And so while
we confess forgiveness, we yet
still have
feelings of many different
degrees, and that's
OK.
JEFFREY BROWN: Anger?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: It's OK
to be angry.
It's OK. It's OK to be tearful.
It's OK to
sometimes want to pull away from
the world
and just be by yourself. It's
OK, because
the road and the path for
grieving, it's different
for every individual.
JEFFREY BROWN: As a pastor, I
wonder, do you
think, how could this happen,
where is God,
where was God at this moment?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Well, my
first response
was just as they were in Bible
study on that
Wednesday night, so was I. And
so I guess
my first line of questioning
was, why them?
And then it was to say, it could
have been
me.
But to say where was God, I
never asked that
question, simply because I truly
believe that
God is omniscient. In other
words, he's everywhere
at the same time. And I believe,
that if God
allowed it, he had a reason for
doing so.
JEFFREY BROWN: This congregation
and you yourself
have spoken out about gun
control issues in
the aftermath, correct?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Correct.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what would
you like to
see happen?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Well, I
would like
to see situations such as the
case with Dylann
Roof and not having a proper
complete background
check, I would like to see that
come to an
end.
I would like to see that loop
closed, because
it has already shown us how
dangerous it actually
is, and can be again, until we
do something
positive and permanently about
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Dylann Roof
himself now faces
the death penalty. Do you
yourself have feelings
about that?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: I never
considered
myself neither judge nor jury.
But what I see is a young man
who -- someone
once asked me, if I were to meet
him, if he
were to ask to have an audience
with me, what
would I say. I would tell him
Jesus loves
him. I would tell him that there
is life beyond
June 17. And that's what I would
say.
I had the opportunity a couple
of weeks ago
to meet his aunt. She came to
me, and she
was a little timid, probably
wondering, what
would I say and how would I
react? And I saw
that she was crying. And I
reached out to
her to give her a hug, and she
stepped back,
and she said, "Well let me tell
you this first."
She said, "I'm Dylann Roof's
aunt."
I said, "But you still need a
hug. Can I hug
you?" And she said yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then you
talked?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: And then
we talked,
and then we prayed. We did.
JEFFREY BROWN: I asked you at
the beginning
how your congregation is doing a
year later.
What about the city, the
culture, all that
that provoked about race
relations in this
country? Where do you see
things?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Well,
while it may
have provoked the need to deal
with race relations,
it also brought to surface how
loving, how
caring and how united this city
really is,
because, in the aftermath of
June 17, the
community joined together,
walked together,
prayed together, worshiped
together.
And so, while we do have a way
to go, we have
come a long way.
JEFFREY BROWN: You feel that?
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: I
honestly do.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Rev.
Dr. Betty Clark,
thank you so much.
REV. BETTY DEAS CLARK: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
we take a
moment to remember the 49 people
whose lives
were tragically cut short Sunday
morning in
Orlando, Florida. Here now are
their names
and faces.
GWEN IFILL: I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.